---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "A week of Athletic Javascript After Three Years of C"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2022-08-31
published: true
labels:
  - Software Engineering
---

For most computer engineering or computer science students, the start of a new semester is synonymous with the start of a new set of programming classes. For myself, one of those new classes is a class called software engineering. So far, this class has had two main differences between it and my previous classes: The use of Javascript instead of C and the implementation of athletic software engineering. The following paragraphs will briefly compare Javascript to C, cover my thoughts on Javascript as a software engineering language, and discuss my experiences with athletic software engineering. 

## Javascript vs. my previous programming experience

Throughout my time as a computer engineering student, the vast majority of my software classes have used C as its programming language of choice. Over the past three years I had become accustomed to declaring my sum variables as integers and my strings as character arrays (library usage was heavily restricted). So when I first saw that an integer, a boolean, and a string could all be declared as a “let” in Javascript, it took me a little while to wrap my head around the idea. Of course, that was only the beginning. In the one week of time that I have been using Javascript, I have already erased countless programming “rules” that I assumed were a constant across most modern programming languages during my time using C. Many of the rigid declarations and syntax requirements of C have been bent or broken in Javascript. This increased flexibility is the main differentiating factor that sets Javascript apart from C and other strongly typed programming languages that I have worked with in the past. 

## Is Javascript good or bad?

When comparing different languages, one of the most common conversations is whether a language is “good” or “bad” compared to other alternatives. Since I have been working with Javascript for only a week, it is hard for me to say that the language is “good” or “bad” in comparison to other languages I have worked with in the past. However, I can say that the weak typing of Javascript does have advantages in certain applications. For example, an array in strongly typed languages is used to store only one type of object, whereas a Javascript array can be used to store many different types of objects that do not need to be linked by a common class or variable type. This feature could be useful for applications such as an online shopping list, where many of the items on the list will have different parameters. Additionally, the ability to use functions as first-class objects allows for greater versatility in the way that they are implemented. On the other hand, the fluidity of Javascript is not always advantageous. For instance, if you wanted your array to only contain integers, then you would need to write additional code to filter out the other undesired types. In summary, so far I have found Javascript to be “good” for some applications and “bad” for others, much like any other programming language. 

## Athletic software engineering

Before the start of this software engineering class, I figured it would be fairly similar to any other programming class I had taken previously; the professor would lecture about some functions or algorithms, and the students would go home and write some code (that may or may not work) for an assignment. However, after one week I have learned that this will not be the case for this class. Instead, this class has implemented an approach to learning called athletic software engineering. From my personal experience, I would describe athletic software engineering as a system of learning that involves repeatedly practicing software engineering skills in high pressure situations. The pressure is created by a time limit and an all or nothing grading system for assessment problems. In other words, anything less than the correct answer completed within the time limit is worth no points. A number of practice assessments are given for students to practice their skills before the actual assessment. After experiencing this system for a week, I can say that it has definitely succeeded in creating a stressful environment, even if the problems are not particularly difficult. Although I do not particularly enjoy this approach, it will definitely give students a lot of experience with working under pressure and encourage students to put more effort into preparation. Looking forward, the main challenge with athletic software engineering that I see for myself is whether or not I will be able to continue to practice and prepare sufficiently as the semester goes on. 
